Gwenevere Abriel: Hi.
Daniel Guerrero: Good morning. Good.
Gwenevere Abriel: MORNING TO YOU.
Gwenevere Abriel: Excellent.
Gwenevere Abriel: Alright, so, um, let's do something a little different. Today, Daniel. See if you can find a comfortable place to to sit
Gwenevere Abriel: Over some Yeah, see if you can have some your, your little ones are away.
Daniel Guerrero: Right. Everyone's in school. I'm just trying to find her pen, right click, I'm sorry I'm not here.
Daniel Guerrero: Oh, just let me go grab a pen, right click and I got my notebook.
Daniel Guerrero: For
Gwenevere Abriel: For individual therapy probably won't need that as much except for writing down appointments
Daniel Guerrero: Okay, okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: Today will probably be more about some experiential exercises. Some mindfulness or it might be around some emotional regulation skills. So because we've been kind of addressing things that have to do with people, places and things and sort of want to shift gears a little bit today. Okay.
Daniel Guerrero: Yes. No.
Gwenevere Abriel: Oh, right it
Gwenevere Abriel: Open up a note, if you could put me down somewhere so that I'm not jumping around and and you want you to little hands free. So sometimes people prop up little book in front of it behind it somehow kind of
Daniel Guerrero: Work.
Gwenevere Abriel: Yeah, see if you can make that work.
Daniel Guerrero: Here.
Daniel Guerrero: I want you to slide down
Gwenevere Abriel: I follow my head all the time.
Gwenevere Abriel: All day just can cause after can cuss i do i get brain damage.
Gwenevere Abriel: Dropped on my head.
Daniel Guerrero: Okay, there we go.
Gwenevere Abriel: Ready. And so let me just check in on on sort of the big
Gwenevere Abriel: Primary relationships. Has anything happened in big categories of job marriage childcare health of the people we love any big changes there and I've got a move coming up anything going on. Maybe let me
Daniel Guerrero: Oh yeah. Whoa.
Daniel Guerrero: All right now. Everything is just fine. I think God for that, you know,
Daniel Guerrero: You know, there, there was a death in my family, but I did not know my cousin, you know, she. He was like,
Daniel Guerrero: You know, third or fourth cousins or something like that, you know, I did not know her. I do not know.
Daniel Guerrero: I guess it's like my dad's brothers.
Daniel Guerrero: Sons.
Daniel Guerrero: Daughters
Daniel Guerrero: I mean, it went. It went it went far
Daniel Guerrero: Like my mom called me. She was just like oh my god so and so, died. And I'm like,
Daniel Guerrero: Who, who is that
Yeah.
Daniel Guerrero: She's just like, oh, this is your dad's brothers, sons, daughters, a daughter. And I'm like,
Daniel Guerrero: Whoa, that's, that's kind of far mom, she goes on. Just letting you know what's going on. I was like, okay.
Daniel Guerrero: So, but
Daniel Guerrero: Other than that, you know,
Daniel Guerrero: Nothing really has been going on, you know, we finally got, you know, moved to situated. And so that was, that was a plus for us because it was it was hectic, you know, having to work and then move at work.
Daniel Guerrero: So it was, it's kind of hectic.
Gwenevere Abriel: So you, um, you've already moved, is no. Oh, wow. You already got everything all hung up on the walls and everything.
Daniel Guerrero: Yeah, we, we try to move fast. You know, it's, it's awesome. I'm exhausted but it was it was worth the movie it was worth the time and energy that we put into it because we got to a nicer place, you know, and something that my kids, you know, actually.
Daniel Guerrero: You know they need it you know they they they deserve it, you know, and so that's something that we try to focus on is, is their needs and less of our wants you know
Gwenevere Abriel: I got you. It feels good to give back in that way.
Daniel Guerrero: There's no
Gwenevere Abriel: Sure does. I got you. I'm just looking through
Gwenevere Abriel: A note a little bit to see if I gave you any chicken with a self and reflect on readiness to eliminate risk factors around sobriety.
Gwenevere Abriel: Exploring next section box breathing technique. Yeah. So that's kind of what I want to do. And then also talk a little bit about not only teach you this very useful.
Gwenevere Abriel: exercise that you can do. Anytime, but also see if you want to create any goals around anger didn't know if that was something you might want to do we
Gwenevere Abriel: Touched on lightly last time.
You know,
Daniel Guerrero: You know, I have been having some issues, you know, with I got two older older sons in the house, you know,
Daniel Guerrero: And I swear they they they act like they have life figured out, you know,
Daniel Guerrero: Once
Daniel Guerrero: once worked out to be 15 and once 20
Daniel Guerrero: And they both they know the world they know how it works. They know
Daniel Guerrero: They know all the do's and don'ts and so it creates a lot of, you know, hostility, because
Daniel Guerrero: You know, at times, you know, I'm like, I've already been through that done that, you know, that's not the right route to take. And so
Daniel Guerrero: A lot of times, it creates you know conflict.
Daniel Guerrero: But one thing I have been trying to do you know is I, you know, I tried it instead of, you know, automatically, you know, pissed off.
Daniel Guerrero: I try to relax a little bit and you know because you know my step dad did a lot of this you know his immediate reaction to being off was just slapping me around. Well, and
Daniel Guerrero: That's something you know I'm trying not to do you know and I'm not gonna sit here and say that I'm an angel, and I don't get pissed off and I don't yell and I don't talk, you know, but
Daniel Guerrero: You know, that's the last, you know, week I have really been tested patients.
Gwenevere Abriel: Then, it sounds like we're picking up on a good topic, one that's really relevant for you and that there's a lot of cool things that you can learn about the self and how to interact with teens and and let's make that a real goal. Let's do that.
Gwenevere Abriel: Let's just first label it let's let's get a real clear sense
Gwenevere Abriel: I like it to come from my clients. So I'd like it to come from you, not me what my goal is that it's less interesting about what I want, but I'd like you to really see as clearly as you can, if you are working towards something around where you are angry, like a goal.
Gwenevere Abriel: What's your goal. Like, how do you word it
Daniel Guerrero: Gonna say
Daniel Guerrero: self control maybe
Gwenevere Abriel: I want self control.
Daniel Guerrero: Right, okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: I want more self control.
Daniel Guerrero: Meteors every now.
Gwenevere Abriel: Because I can see you have some
Daniel Guerrero: I tried. We tried to have no
Gwenevere Abriel: I know you do because you need in here and I bring up some pretty difficult topics I bring them up and you, how are they have show the ability to listen you you try on some of the things that I say you think about them. You run them through your own stories in history that takes patience.
Gwenevere Abriel: Self Confidence and ego strength to do those things. And that's going to be really useful when you're interacting with a teenager.
Gwenevere Abriel: I know, I know, I know. So we're going to get into that I want. So I've got it written here. I want more self control. I'm going to get into how to accomplish that, or at least one task that we can do I put a little pin in it for now because I don't want to miss this opportunity.
Gwenevere Abriel: To teach something I wanted to that I mentioned last time, which has to do with up by box breathing.
Gwenevere Abriel: So it goes by a lot of different names. Let me just hit save, so that I don't have to focus on that. Alright. So you talk a little bit about it first.
Gwenevere Abriel: Of all of the things all the little tricks and you know techniques and
Gwenevere Abriel: Ways to cope with oneself in distress.
Gwenevere Abriel: Diet for matic breathing has been the most effective and so I can't wait to teach it to you.
Gwenevere Abriel: Right.
Gwenevere Abriel: The science behind it. So first I'll tell you the science.
Gwenevere Abriel: And you see my stomach.
Gwenevere Abriel: Yes. So the reason I call it box breathing, you'll see why because it's four seconds. Inhale hold for four seconds. Exhale for four seconds hold for four seconds. So it's this box, if you will, like this little visual aid.
Gwenevere Abriel: But really what it is, is it's diaphragm breathing. So when you're sitting here like this. Right. You kind of leaning over
Gwenevere Abriel: Typically when we're going throughout the day as adults we have forgotten to breathe into our belly when we're babies don't know if you remember looking at a baby. You see it's cute little belly go, Whoa, whoa, whoa. It's so adorable. He's not a little belly going up now.
Gwenevere Abriel: And
Gwenevere Abriel: We stopped doing that we breathe up here.
Gwenevere Abriel: Right, you know, because these little shoulders go up and down, and especially we do it when we're about to punch someone in the nose. We're about to defend our, our opinion.
Gwenevere Abriel: Right, I'm right. You're wrong, you're good, you're bad or someone coming at us with a criticism. Bottom line is when we're having a threat response.
Gwenevere Abriel: We're going to have a short shallow breaths real up high on right in the long, it won't be down low, with the full lung.
Gwenevere Abriel: And you know you're having a full breath in. When the belly pooches out when it kind of comes out and it's really hard to do because most of us stop doing that a long time ago.
Gwenevere Abriel: Now let me tell you about the science behind it. Like, why bother I air I breathe. I know I breathe. I'm fine. Like, what's the point right you like I read just fine.
Gwenevere Abriel: Well, let me tell you some some cool things about it. Have you ever heard of. It's okay if you haven't met everybody has that we're wired for
Gwenevere Abriel: Like, what do you call it biofeedback. I think that's the word I'm looking for. The bottom line is we have a sympathetic nervous system.
Gwenevere Abriel: The one
Gwenevere Abriel: That puts you into fight or flight you know it because it's immediately. Someone says something you're you get hot. Right.
Gwenevere Abriel: That's your sympathetic nervous system responding to a perception of danger or threat. You don't have to think about it. Oh, this guy is a threat know it happens unconsciously instantaneously.
Gwenevere Abriel: The interesting thing is, I mean it happens before you can even get it doesn't go all the way to the language part of the brain.
Gwenevere Abriel: You feel it actually in the body first and then the limbic system kicks in. So you're going to have that sympathetic response instantaneously. And it's kept you alive and I'm so glad it's there and we don't want it to go anywhere. We need it.
Gwenevere Abriel: We're going to jump back right we're going to self, protect, we don't have to think, should I jump back from that knife from that dog that snarling, right, we're just going to do it instinctively. That's what I'm talking about. That's your, your sympathetic nervous system.
Gwenevere Abriel: But there's another system inside of you, the parasympathetic nervous system, which is naturally
Gwenevere Abriel: There to down regulate because you can't think about. Can you imagine being that heart counting 24 seven always like that you, you wouldn't survive at that rate. Right. So the bonding. Yeah, the body knows it has to turn it down.
Great.
Gwenevere Abriel: So the body knows
Gwenevere Abriel: That it has to have this neutral.
Gwenevere Abriel: State this relaxed state and artists five. We can't stay activated like that all the time. So we have this meat system and the one I'm going to talk to you about right now is the Vegas nerve.
Gwenevere Abriel: There is a nerve that goes from all of our organs, all those guts and spleens and kidneys and stomach.
Gwenevere Abriel: Can lungs and heart it's connected this Vegas nerve starts at a brand called the wandering nerve and it goes for, you know, goes all over the place.
Gwenevere Abriel: And the neat thing is it's wrapped around our organs down here below our diaphragm. We have this slack that's in here.
Gwenevere Abriel: That distinguishes the top stuff from the bottom stuff. And when you breathe in and you breathe out into that belly.
Gwenevere Abriel: It pushes the diaphragm down right when all that air gets filled into the lung lay down at the bottom, it pushes the diaphragm down and it smashes the organs down below.
Gwenevere Abriel: Now what's wrapped around those organs at the bottom, the Vegas nerve that Vegas nerve is all wrapped around here. And remember, it has this connection that goes all the way up to my brain.
Gwenevere Abriel: And what it says is, hey, what's in complete contradiction to what's going up, up here around the stress response like we're in danger.
Gwenevere Abriel: We can't be India, how can how can we be breathing a big breath like that if we were in danger is in complete contradiction to the stress response.
Gwenevere Abriel: So it says. It says to the brain. We're fine.
Gwenevere Abriel: If this body can be breathing like that this man this human is okay, there's no actual lion tiger or bear or right someone threatening our life. We're. Oh, OK.
Gwenevere Abriel: And the feedback system that balancing that neurofeedback system that balancing occurs where we down regulate. So watch what happens. We do our I'll teach it to you in a minute for some giving you the science. So you're going to have this belly breath, it sends a signal up. We're okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: sends it up and then heart rate goes down.
Gwenevere Abriel: It literally lowers the heart rate, the demand for blood rather for oxygen into into the heart is reduced and the amount of oxygen. This needed decreases.
Gwenevere Abriel: All of the blood that was in our large muscle groups because we're when we're about to throw blows and we're all we're about to run. Where do we be all our blood, we need in our eyes in our large muscle group and in our biceps.
Gwenevere Abriel: Not in our fingertips and certainly not in the most evolved part of our brain, which is the prefrontal cortex. So you don't need to be thinking about all of the complex things when you're about to
Gwenevere Abriel: Get into a fight. You just need to keep your eyes called My opera, you're just looking right in front of you, everything around you disappears. You're just right here right you're right here.
Gwenevere Abriel: This breath will send a signal and again I'll review sends a signal. We're okay heart rate goes down, breathing then becomes nice and easy.
Gwenevere Abriel: The blood then goes to our fingertips. They can warm up again. They were kind of cold before blood then goes to a higher order of the brain. And we can use logic and reasoning, it would say, oh, there's really no threat here. We're okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: It is amazing how fast it can happen how and and this is this is the thing. It isn't just about
Gwenevere Abriel: Someone coming at you at a restaurant just drunk or just looking like a madman. Right. It's not only there but also when someone like a teenager.
Gwenevere Abriel: Gives you live.
Gwenevere Abriel: AND YOU I CAN TELL YOU WANT TO STAY POISED AND centered. It means a lot to you. You really been hurt your story is so painful and you want to change your generation. You want to be a different parent want to set in motion. I think right this a different way to discipline.
Gwenevere Abriel: This is going to give you time and that's what you need. I'm talking about Fractions, fractions of a second. But that's all you really need. You need that time for the blood to get
Gwenevere Abriel: Up to the prefrontal cortex so that you can use isn't and logic and you can be like, Oh, man. What was that thing that I learned about what to say to my son. And guess what, now you're gonna
Gwenevere Abriel: But you can't remember when you're hot when you're so angry and show. Ah.
Gwenevere Abriel: Just want to
Gwenevere Abriel: Get it by the neck.
Gwenevere Abriel: We want to use this breath to have a relaxed body so that our brains work better, faster, stronger, and we can remember the cool skills that you're learning. Okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: Are you with me so far.
Daniel Guerrero: Yes, ma'am. Okay.
Daniel Guerrero: Oh,
Daniel Guerrero: I can hear you. Oh no, that's not okay.
Daniel Guerrero: And I'm happy to go over time, but
Daniel Guerrero: Right now.
Daniel Guerrero: I'd like to actually fight.
Gwenevere Abriel: So,
Gwenevere Abriel: You're gonna want to have
Gwenevere Abriel: Room.
To go
Gwenevere Abriel: You don't want to me.
Daniel Guerrero: I've got some in here so I keep hearing my own voice coming back to me.
Gwenevere Abriel: All right, here we go.
Gwenevere Abriel: So first I'm going to teach it to you and then you can do it along with me. Okay.
Daniel Guerrero: You don't start whenever you want to. But
Gwenevere Abriel: First, just know that I'm just teaching. So if it seems fast, it's because I'm just instructing so the basic premise between for this diet for matic breathing or box breathing is this you will be inhaling through the nose right for four seconds. So see me going in.
Gwenevere Abriel: And I'm holding my breath for four seconds.
Gwenevere Abriel: Holding it and then I'm exhaling.
Holding
Gwenevere Abriel: Holding
Gwenevere Abriel: Holding. Oops, I forgot to do
Gwenevere Abriel: Inhale at the top. So let me go over it again, a couple of things. This
Gwenevere Abriel: This does take a little bit of practice because a lot of practice, it's an unnatural breath. Nobody breaks, like this. Right.
Daniel Guerrero: Right.
Gwenevere Abriel: We all just breathe in and out right now. And now, nobody's holding their breath.
Gwenevere Abriel: A couple of things to talk about. Number one, breathing in through the nose. And not only are we breathing in through the nose.
Gwenevere Abriel: We're also using this mindfulness practice you'll hear a lot about a lot about that. It's a very popular word, and especially in a program like this mindfulness has to do with I've decided to focus on how that airfields going into my nose.
Gwenevere Abriel: I can feel it going in and I can feel it kind of entering and now I can feel it as it comes in. I can have my hands here and I can feel it expanding in the bottom along and it pushes my hands out and then as I blow out. I can feel it coming out of my mouth pushing out
Gwenevere Abriel: My hands collapse in so
Gwenevere Abriel: I DON'T EVEN KNOW WHETHER IT'S GOING TO BE that's going to be
Gwenevere Abriel: Something, I'll have to review again. I don't know how how comfortable, you're going to be doing this, but we'll find out. But I like to add that part because it isn't just breathing in.
Gwenevere Abriel: It also helps to be actually feeling on a tactile way the sensation. Okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: So as inhaling through the nose feeling all of the air going into the nose and
Gwenevere Abriel: What I call this sort of belly breath right you're breathing in pushing the bottom part of that long. All the ears and down there, then you're holding your breath for four seconds. So it's an inhale for four seconds.
Gwenevere Abriel: You hold it for four seconds and then you're exhaling, all of it out with a flat belly, push, push, push, push, push, push in the hold it out. Sometimes it's not four seconds. That's okay. And sometimes it's only two. That's okay. That last part. So right then you inhale again.
For for
Gwenevere Abriel: And right and exhale it out. We should all out all of it out and hold nowhere hold nowhere. Then inhale and for for
Gwenevere Abriel: And hold and
Gwenevere Abriel: Let me see. Push it all out of your mouth out of the mouth. Yeah. Hold your hands there. So let me do a little more instruction. It's a little hard to tell because it's all like a black color.
Gwenevere Abriel: Right, this is how pay attention, less to what you see over here really turn your attention to
Gwenevere Abriel: Being mindful of your shoulders going up and down, up and down, you're going to know that you're just doing this top long thing versus paying attention to those hands that are expanding out
Gwenevere Abriel: So watch. Let's just do a few breaths. Just to see if we can even do it within to your nose and push that air push those hands out can even do it all. You did it. You are doing it. That's fantastic.
Gwenevere Abriel: So you did it. And it really doesn't move very far. That's fine. Okay, and then push it out, of course.
Gwenevere Abriel: Really flat like as much as all that are that you possibly can, letting it out and then you hold it.
Gwenevere Abriel: And then you hold it out. So I've given you instruction and you I've watched you you were doing it along with me. You didn't have to. When she tried it on. Now I want to actually have us do it together. You
Know,
Gwenevere Abriel: First of all, let me check in and see any parts of it, you have questions about or that's confusing.
Daniel Guerrero: Questions. Okay, so
Gwenevere Abriel: It's basically 444444 seconds of
Gwenevere Abriel: Inhale, four seconds hold four seconds of exhale four seconds of hold breath.
Gwenevere Abriel: Very awkward, not a natural breath.
Gwenevere Abriel: Now I want to, I want to put it to the test, a little bit. I want you to think about something recent that happened. It was kind of like, oh, I wanted to bring that kids neck.
Gwenevere Abriel: And got very frustrated insulted maybe maybe disrespected, those are usually pretty big triggers for people kind of get that in your mind. Can you picture an event that happened fairly recently. Yes, ma'am. Okay. Not hard to search for right there, right there.
Gwenevere Abriel: Okay. And so how distressing is that for you which you say
Daniel Guerrero: Oh, it's pretty disturbing you know it's it's not even a stressful, it's it's a it's a disturbance also yeah so
Gwenevere Abriel: We're going to do the exercise now. So this is because this is an actual technique. So you have that in your mind, you can tell, this isn't just stressful. This is a disturbance. So now we're going to do this together.
Gwenevere Abriel: And let me just watch you. And now let's have a nice inhale through the nose.
Gwenevere Abriel: Hold 321 push it all out.
Gwenevere Abriel: Hold, hold, hold. Let's inhale through the nose.
Gwenevere Abriel: big belly, push, push, push, and let's hold 321 push it all out of your mouth, push it all out flat belly.
Gwenevere Abriel: Hold it out for 321 and let's inhale through the nose.
Gwenevere Abriel: big belly big belly. There we go. And let's hold it for 321 pushing all that in that mouth, push, push, push, push, push, nice flat belly, get it all out of their time said out breath as longer hold it out 321 let's inhale.
Gwenevere Abriel: And hold 321 exhale it out, push it all out conscious of that air coming out of your mouth paying attention to it.
Gwenevere Abriel: And let's hold
Gwenevere Abriel: And let's inhale feel that are coming through the nostrils and filling up the bottom part of your long
Gwenevere Abriel: And let's hold it for 321 push it all out. Feel that air on those pure slips pushing it all out flat belly fat belly. Let's hold 321 inhale.
Gwenevere Abriel: And that's beautiful 321 push it all out. Exhale.
Gwenevere Abriel: Hold 321 that's inhale.
Gwenevere Abriel: Nice Buddha belly right there, push that out. Got it. Hold it 321 and exhale.
Gwenevere Abriel: And now, just do it on your on quietly.
Gwenevere Abriel: Very nice and open your eyes.
Gwenevere Abriel: Let's let me check in with you how how distressing. Are you feeling now.
Daniel Guerrero: And I'll be honest, I'm kind of quite relaxed, you know,
Gwenevere Abriel: Amazing, huh.
Daniel Guerrero: Right, good, you know, minute, just a
Daniel Guerrero: quite relaxed, you know,
Gwenevere Abriel: Another thing that's happening. Just so you know, not only that physiology that I explained to you about the Vegas nerve that that sending a signal to the brain that you're okay you can be, you can afford safely be in a relaxed body. There's actually no danger.
Gwenevere Abriel: That's just a perceived threat response. So not only is that happening, physiologically, but look how much concentration this drug.
Gwenevere Abriel: Get a really concentrate to learn something new. Right. It's not a natural breath, you'd like have to like think about it.
Gwenevere Abriel: Guess what your brain is doing is focused on the breathing and not on some, you know, Oh no, my son. Oh no, my son. Oh no, my son. Oh, no.
Gwenevere Abriel: It's sitting here, focusing all of his attention on this very difficult breathing technique.
Gwenevere Abriel: Right, okay, which in and of itself works. Think about it. We get stressed, we get upset about something, if we're at work all day. We kind of forget about it. We're focused on our job. That's the same mechanism of action happening right there.
Gwenevere Abriel: Where it takes concentration we want that we like the distraction, because it takes our concentration it especially happens when we're learning something new and just now, you learn something new. So your focus was like really trying to get it right. Right.
Gwenevere Abriel: Yeah. And you also notice that your, your stress level went way down and you get older, you're like, man, I gotta feel calm.
Gwenevere Abriel: When you hear me say, Hey, Daniel. Have you been box breathing. Have you been taking even three 410 cycles of that when you notice an elevated heart rate when you notice, maybe your jaws clenched or your cat clenched hands. I'm not sure what your stress response is
Gwenevere Abriel: But taking that time to do this. Maybe you do it in front of people. You can do it without it really being noticeable. Or maybe you decide to go into the restroom or off you know off on the walk or in a car in your room and you do it.
Gwenevere Abriel: What's going to happen is you're gonna be able to think straight, you kind of like the decision, you're going to have that. Oh, I thought it through.
Gwenevere Abriel: I like the outcome better. I thought this through. In fact, I thought it's so true. I'm not gonna mess with this anymore the timings off. I don't want to deal right now that might end up being what but you'll be able to think a little bit clearer. Okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: So what I'm going to invite you to do to really play with this because, again, I've watched this has been a powerful piece of people's recovery process.
Gwenevere Abriel: That that they have this that they know even if I'm completely wigging out. I can go to this breath and I can be in a relaxed body. I will think better. I will solve this problem better
Gwenevere Abriel: They use it and use it and use it, use it.
Gwenevere Abriel: I would invite you to do it as soon as consciousness as soon as you wake up. Maybe you already do a routine of of prayer or you're reading the Bible or some some cons something you're doing, I don't know, but you can incorporate this breath work with it.
Gwenevere Abriel: Soon as you wake up, you're like, Oh man, I'm awake.
Gwenevere Abriel: You know it.
Daniel Guerrero: That's how I woke up this morning.
Daniel Guerrero: You know, I have been having
Daniel Guerrero: You know, last couple weeks. You know, my wife's car messed up. And then she woke me up this morning. She's like, there's something wrong with my car, you need to go figure it out.
Daniel Guerrero: And so I go out there and I go to turn on the car and it just makes this
Daniel Guerrero: Weird like cleaning, cleaning and
Daniel Guerrero: Cleaning and noise and I'm just like, oh my gosh. Here we go. Another $500 to fix it, you know. So, my mind's already racing. I'm already like thinking the worst.
Daniel Guerrero: But come to find out it was just a loose ball.
Daniel Guerrero: At it, so
Daniel Guerrero: Anyways,
Gwenevere Abriel: No, just perfect. That would have been a good time.
Daniel Guerrero: Right.
Gwenevere Abriel: As soon as you heard, you know, you'd say, I'll be right there and you
Gwenevere Abriel: And you can tell your wife. Hey, I'm doing this funny funny breathing. So if you ever see me look a little weird.
Gwenevere Abriel: You get in your heads up, you're not losing your mind.
Gwenevere Abriel: And later on. I mean, you're going to hear a lot about this later on. I mean, why can't we teach it to our kids. Hello. Yeah, we're going to teach you to them because what if they're in class.
Gwenevere Abriel: And the teachers being nasty and we don't want to take it personally. We meet. We just need to get our work done buckle down focus
Gwenevere Abriel: We can breathe, we can teach our children how to emotionally regulate. Wow. Powerful stuff wish they were already teaching this in the school system, but we can teach it to them. Right.
Gwenevere Abriel: So, but first you may want to fall in love with it. First, see if you like it.
Gwenevere Abriel: And then, of course, it's easier to teach. Once you've got that confidence. This really works man you you angry, frustrated with your someone's got your toys someone's got something
Gwenevere Abriel: Doable breath work and figure out how to solve it. Okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: We want to do that before we grab the toy before we hit someone before we act out. We want to get centered and that's a powerful way to do it. So my invitation is in the morning.
Gwenevere Abriel: My invitation is maybe on a lunch break. And right before you go to bed. And when you notice that you're getting really pissed off.
Gwenevere Abriel: Do that. First you already. I think you you know some things about you take a little bit of time. But now you have this very structured way to spend that time and doing this breath work is going to help you be in a relaxed body and your brain is going to work better.
Gwenevere Abriel: Okay, so that
Gwenevere Abriel: Is box breathing so glad to have it now. Do you have any questions about it.
Daniel Guerrero: OH NO MA'AM. You know, I'm just gonna be honest, I, you know, it's something I think that I'm gonna have to pass on, you know, you gotta be honest man there's sometimes there's just so much going on knowing our and it's like, what are we going to do about it.
Daniel Guerrero: dressers you know we got a lot of
Daniel Guerrero: Um, you know, my family. I don't have a small family you know and i and i do have toddlers in house and and it's something that they like to catch a flight to catch new things, you know, so
Daniel Guerrero: I want to, I want to experiment with this with them, you know, I'm yelling and screaming and I'm like, hold on, let's
Daniel Guerrero: Read
Gwenevere Abriel: That's right.
Gwenevere Abriel: Oh yeah, oh my gosh, it works.
Daniel Guerrero: And then we can talk when you're calm. So there's breathing. It's something that I think they're going to enjoy it and accept it.
Gwenevere Abriel: And I would invite you, again, really, really see if you're going to buy into it.
Gwenevere Abriel: Do it for, you know, a few days even just to be like, hey, wait, I did it when I as I caught someone on the phone and we're normally I couldn't even think straight
Gwenevere Abriel: Ready. So here's the thing that happens with memory, you actually don't have access
Gwenevere Abriel: To the memory that you need when you're trying to problem solve. When you're talking with someone when you're so stressed out. This is going to help you be able to access the needed memory in order to even have an hour decent argument, make your point.
Gwenevere Abriel: Okay, it helps it helps it helps it helps and everything.
Gwenevere Abriel: Wake up lunch break before bed or, you know, during prayer, meditation, however, you go about it. And then also catch it. See if you can actually say, Oh man, I'm remembering to do it right now. I'm so upset. Oh, we're doing now.
Gwenevere Abriel: And you do it and then you can come back in here and you can say whether I'm making it up or not, you can come in and say,
Gwenevere Abriel: Wow, this really did work or maybe you'll come back and say, No, and I can see. I'll fine tune and see what maybe might be off a little bit. Okay. Yes, ma'am. But I'm excited. I'm glad you liked it. That's cool. I don't have to keep selling it, you already like it.
Gwenevere Abriel: Alright, so, um, why don't you spend a little bit of time talking about
Gwenevere Abriel: What we're really talking about here. We've got a little bit of time. Why don't you tell me what's going on with you and your boys what's what's really going down when you guys are arguing
Daniel Guerrero: Um, you know what I think.
Daniel Guerrero: What I really think it is.
Daniel Guerrero: And you know, I, and I've been asking, you know, I you know I asked myself, all these questions like what's what's really, what are they really doing. It's gonna be so much, you know, and so
Daniel Guerrero: I don't know if you know who
Daniel Guerrero: Steve verdict is or not.
Daniel Guerrero: These
Daniel Guerrero: Asterix great pastor and I watched him quite a bit and
Daniel Guerrero: So anyways, um,
Daniel Guerrero: You know what irritates me most was that they have no self discipline. Okay. And what I mean by self discipline is that they don't pick up after themselves, you know, they don't voluntarily, you know, throw out the
Daniel Guerrero: Dishes, you know, and that irritates the shit out of me. I want to be honest, you know, when I was there.
Daniel Guerrero: Now, is there a little stuff that that my parents made me do you know that I did my own damn analogy, you know, if I use the dishes. I cleaned up at the trash was full, and it can be thrown out. I threw it out.
Daniel Guerrero: Without question, you know, and this, this is I just, I just think it's the age that we're in now it's it some parents aren't pushing that on their kids, you know, they're letting them run wild and letting them do whatever they want.
Daniel Guerrero: And so then the first time that they get in trouble. Their parents are bailing them out of the trouble or taking the responsibility of their actions into their own hands.
Daniel Guerrero: And it's something that I'm not going to allow myself to do for them, you know, they have to. They have to be able to take, you know, responsibility of their own action. You know, there's a, you know, I learned. I learned there's you know there's there's two definitions of
Daniel Guerrero: What was the consequences. You know, there's a good consequence. And there's a bad consequence if you if you have a if you if you're doing what's good and you're doing what's right.
Daniel Guerrero: The consequences of that is you're going to be rewarded or you're going to be recognized. When you're doing that shit and you know you know that we all know that, you know,
Daniel Guerrero: Maybe going to gym, you know, maybe getting in trouble are being put on probation. And that's not where I want to see them. I don't want to see them bad consequences rewards. Better yet, I would rather have good consequences.
Daniel Guerrero: And so
Gwenevere Abriel: Daniel. Let's talk about that with the time we have the way you learned it your parenting, if I'm not mistaken used it fear.
Gwenevere Abriel: To shape that behavior.
Daniel Guerrero: Yeah yeah
Gwenevere Abriel: And I don't think you want to do that. And what I'm wondering is do you know what to do. Instead, do you actually know that there's this whole field of parenting information on what to do to shape behavior when you aren't using the threat of corporal punishment. Do you know what to do.
Daniel Guerrero: You know I'm
Daniel Guerrero: Going to be honest, you know what, what I've been trying to do is, and I don't know if this is the right thing or not but you know I had been taking the time to sit down and say hey look, guys. If I'm doing something wrong. I want you to hold me accountable for you.
Daniel Guerrero: Know and and I'm going to hold and I'm going to pull you out on your shit to
Gwenevere Abriel: With you.
Daniel Guerrero: And but I know it's like I told them.
Daniel Guerrero: You can change.
Daniel Guerrero: And and I'm willing
Daniel Guerrero: I'm willing to change with you.
Gwenevere Abriel: You're showing
Gwenevere Abriel: Respect. You are a respectful man you are respecting your children. That's really beautiful to hear about and
Daniel Guerrero: So that's what I try to do is I try to meet them halfway, not where I want them to do is I try to lead to try to leave my home by know I go to work every day and margin needs to be done. I do it when purpose needs to be thrown I throw it dishes need to be done. I watched them.
Daniel Guerrero: You know, so like I tried, and I tried to build, you know, in them. You know what it is to be responsible but they don't they don't catch it well. And so, and I'm gonna be on the ship pisses me off.
Gwenevere Abriel: I know it.
Daniel Guerrero: Gets me upset that whenever I come home from work and there's a sink full the dishes and I have three teenagers in the house, and no one has done.
Daniel
Gwenevere Abriel: When does a human brain stop developing
Daniel Guerrero: I don't know. I don't think it ever stops.
Gwenevere Abriel: As well.
Gwenevere Abriel: It keeps there's this thing called neuroplasticity is a different discussion. I'm talking about child development, a brain actually becomes developed at a particular age, we have an adult brain. Do you know when it is, is it 13
Daniel Guerrero: I think it's like 18 isn't it.
Gwenevere Abriel: It is not keep going, keep going.
Daniel Guerrero: 25
Gwenevere Abriel: For women.
Gwenevere Abriel: For men, it's closer to 27
Gwenevere Abriel: You believe that
Daniel Guerrero: Well, I didn't even know that.
Gwenevere Abriel: I know. And you know what part is the last part to come online. The last part of the brain to grow. Do you know
Daniel Guerrero: Maybe because I think that I might know but I don't know what we're going to call it because I'm at the age of 40 now and I finally realized, you know,
Daniel Guerrero: I'm finally getting my shit together and I'm like wait a
Daniel Guerrero: Terminology to this.
Gwenevere Abriel: But, but, you know, it's probably somewhere. I've isn't about right, wrong, good, bad, like doing the right thing.
Gwenevere Abriel: Yes. Yeah, it is. That is the part of the brain. So hold on yourself.
Gwenevere Abriel: Okay, if our culture if if our school system, our government. Right. You notice how you said 18 you know 18 because now I can pull you into the military, you can smoke for a while there you could drink, you can do all kinds of right this is based on science.
Gwenevere Abriel: If it was based on science. It'd be like 25
Gwenevere Abriel: Okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: So watch because you don't know
Gwenevere Abriel: And I'll just play devil's advocate here. I don't mean I'm not attacking. I'm just saying. Most people are doing this. Most people don't know that there's 13 year old son.
Gwenevere Abriel: Doesn't have the frontal lobe. That's not what I was talking about the one you need to really think through and problem solve.
Gwenevere Abriel: That's not done growing in fact that 13 year old won't be done for what another 14 years
Daniel Guerrero: Years well
Gwenevere Abriel: Okay, so hold on to that aha moment, right, so I've been asking my son.
Gwenevere Abriel: To know how to think through the consequences of something
Gwenevere Abriel: Really way before
Gwenevere Abriel: His brain is even finished developing so hold on yourself. Right.
Gwenevere Abriel: What is what's been happening when you nag you can pick it up. Pick up the laundry. Why don't you go do the dishes Z right when you do that.
Gwenevere Abriel: What you're doing is you're you're being the
Gwenevere Abriel: Executive functioning. We call it that's that frontal lobe part executive. Doesn't that sound like that's higher order, it's like the best you can be an executive right
Gwenevere Abriel: That's what that is executive functioning all this organization and Planning and thinking this analytical thinking it through and do a drawing the dots between my actions now delayed gratification will will come later.
Gwenevere Abriel: We have 13 year old is like not even remotely. It's not even on his radar hold on to yourself. Here we go. But when you nag.
Gwenevere Abriel: You are folding outside of him and external
Gwenevere Abriel: Executive functioning. Now, if, if, on top of this, this information, you say to yourself, Oh, now I get it. He's not being defiant
Gwenevere Abriel: He's just not grown up yet. Well, I want to teach him how to develop that part of the brain, right, I can tell you, do you want to have responsibility you don't you
Gwenevere Abriel: Right. Yes. So if you let go of a stigma, or an opinion that he should know already, if we let that go. Because your frame of reference was
Gwenevere Abriel: Very much based on on a fear threat response you learned it because of fear and that there's another way to learn. There's another way for this 13 year old to learn and develop that part of the brain, but it will ask a view that you're going to have to do some
Gwenevere Abriel: You mentioned the word reward and recognition that's positive reinforcement and there's also discipline which could be privilege removal. We take phone, you don't get to stay up as late you right privilege removal, you don't get to go out, things like that.
Daniel Guerrero: Right.
Gwenevere Abriel: That will help shape that developing brain.
Gwenevere Abriel: But you're going to have to get over the fact that for a while. I'll make up a number. The next three weeks if you did like the the parenting ideas that I have
Gwenevere Abriel: It might take a while for them to believe that you're going to follow through. They're going to test it like any adolescent would they'll find out, well, because you really got to do that.
Gwenevere Abriel: And then your job is to follow through and then they learn. Oh, I'm going to avoid the discomfort of not having my phone, not being able to stay up til 10 o'clock at night. I want to be able to watch the TV. I want to be able to go on the family gathering
Gwenevere Abriel: I gotta, I gotta keep an eye on how I'm talking and I need to. Oh, I got this. This a chart, my, my chart that I'm supposed to be working on get done each day I'm knocked out. I did it. Now, I don't have to hear my old man talking to me right
Daniel Guerrero: Right.
Gwenevere Abriel: So,
Gwenevere Abriel: There's a lot of hurdles to get through on this. There's an understanding that the brain. They're not trying to be a jerk. It just doesn't occur to them.
Gwenevere Abriel: And if you're willing to do the parenting part which has to do with
Gwenevere Abriel: I mean, I told you, I'm a marriage and family therapist, right. So this is like my groove right
Gwenevere Abriel: So if you're willing to get past the should like he should already know if you can kind of let that go and say, all right, let me have a fresh look at this, I may have been asking
Gwenevere Abriel: My son to do something but wasn't willing to shape the behavior in a healthy way. I don't want to do it. The negative way. My family did it all I do is shaped this behavior in a positive way.
Gwenevere Abriel: What can work if you're willing to follow through and that's that's on you is you lay out. This is how it's going to go, man.
Gwenevere Abriel: I don't want to yell anymore.
Gwenevere Abriel: I don't want to be this stressed out longer from my heart. Alright so I'ma tell you right now, these are your chores, they got to be done by this time, or this privilege is going to be removed and if you do it for a month. Guess what.
Gwenevere Abriel: It's going to go and we're going to go get lessons such video game or upgrade your phone. I don't know what
Gwenevere Abriel: And then your job is going to be
All those throws
Gwenevere Abriel: Just let me check in so far out for right at the top of the hour, but just so far. What are you hearing that seems like you like it you don't like it, you're interested not interested. What's happening for you.
Daniel Guerrero: You know I'm always open for
Daniel Guerrero: For change. I'm always open for you know trying to
Daniel Guerrero: You know better myself as a parent. And also, you know,
Daniel Guerrero: Because you know i want i want my parenting skills to be able to go to my kids so that
Daniel Guerrero: So that their parenting skills will also be as you know as good, you know, like, you know, I wanted to, I want to be a better parent and my parents were to me, and I would like for my kids to be better parents than I am to them to their kids.
Daniel Guerrero: What I mean, and so, and that's something that I, you know, I'm going to be honest, it's hard for me, you know, because the environment that I was raised and, you know,
Daniel Guerrero: I catch myself, you know, doing things. The thing that my parents said to me that I know at the time was, at the time, you know, and everybody's all pissed off, you know,
Daniel Guerrero: And everybody's just barking back at each other. It's like, it really doesn't have an effect at that moment. But as we linger on to it. It's like, yeah, I can't believe I said that, or I can't believe that it went that far.
Daniel Guerrero: And so then it, then it becomes
Daniel Guerrero: It becomes a questionable. Well, is that how they really feel
Gwenevere Abriel: Know we said it in the heat of the moment, and we regret it. I understand.
Gwenevere Abriel: What I'm offering you Daniel is this is basically how the world works. What I'm suggesting is in this little microcosm of your home.
Gwenevere Abriel: There is a cause and effect. There's a consequences. You mentioned and let's just say that they start over time to realize that what they do or they don't do affects the people that they live with.
Gwenevere Abriel: And there is a consequence, you've laid it out and you follow through and they had to write 100 sentences.
Gwenevere Abriel: They will learn over time. I would rather just real quick. Do those dirty dishes and run that run it through, because I'm sick and tired of reading the sentences and guess what. Isn't that how the outside world works. When I don't register my car.
Gwenevere Abriel: What happens. Oh, I get pulled over.
Gwenevere Abriel: When I don't put oil in
Gwenevere Abriel: My car right when I don't put gas in it.
Gwenevere Abriel: That is actually how the world works. We don't
Gwenevere Abriel: Have that we don't get yelled at by our boss or hopefully we don't we don't get punched hopefully by our boss.
Gwenevere Abriel: But we might get fire, we might get written up. We do have a net. It's very much like what I'm talking about. It has to do with this is how the world works. You've got it, got to
Gwenevere Abriel: live in harmony with people and do your fair share. That's appropriate developmental age, you take on these chores you show respect to speak, respectfully, these are our family values. Well guess what, when you go out into the world. There's a bunch of rules out there.
Gwenevere Abriel: You already learned as a young man, how to follow rules and know that you're still a good love
Gwenevere Abriel: Young man, but you follow them. And guess how much easier is going to be to go get your first job bussing at a restaurant when your boss says, Man, this is, this is your section. You've got these these six tables. Why you in the back.
Gwenevere Abriel: He's not going to do that. He's gonna remember
Gwenevere Abriel: I need to do the job if I want money I needed a job because I want to avoid a consequence of a write up or getting fired because he will have learned it in your home.
Gwenevere Abriel: It's how the world works. We follow these rules, some of them we like more than others. Some of our early annoying and they don't make any sense to us.
Gwenevere Abriel: But that's how the world works.
Gwenevere Abriel: And he gets to learn it in the home with you.
Gwenevere Abriel: But don't give yourself a hard time for losing it, Daniel. The work I want to do with you and I haven't gotten there yet, but we will is getting at, at that trauma you you had some real trauma early on. Okay. And so when someone does something like just relax you or
Gwenevere Abriel: Feel this
Gwenevere Abriel: Oh,
Gwenevere Abriel: This is some
Gwenevere Abriel: Big
Gwenevere Abriel: For part time a little better. Okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: And I hope you heard there are ways morning more mind a ways to teach our children.
Gwenevere Abriel: what your values are so that they can go out into the world with confidence that they know who they are. They have a sense of efficacy. I can work hard for something
Gwenevere Abriel: And the world is predictable, it will reinforce me with a new Xbox game.
Gwenevere Abriel: Or money, which is an adult reward. I'll have a rewarding relationship. But guess what this person that's respectful to people in the family will make friends and keep those friends out there in the world.
Gwenevere Abriel: What you're teaching in this home it expands outward right all the way out into the community.
Gwenevere Abriel: So let's come back to this and if it turns out that you like the the box breathing.
Gwenevere Abriel: What you and I can do is whatever's coming up for you at the time. We can either go and we can do if you want to. I could go into some parenting techniques, if you want to. If not, we'll go whatever direction is needed at the time.
Gwenevere Abriel: But just let it kind of sit there and see, see what happens for you as far as kind of the expectation that you have for your, your, your teenage boys they pick their brain isn't done growing
Daniel Guerrero: Well, that kind of puts a different a different perspective to it, you know, because now I can look at a different you know
Daniel Guerrero: Maybe I'm just trying to make them grow up too fast. Maybe I'm just being, you know, a little hard ass. Maybe I need to sit back
Daniel Guerrero: A little bit. And, you know, look at the whole picture and I just what I expect you know and so that's something that most definitely going to do and take time and, you know, reflect on
Gwenevere Abriel: So far what you said is, you're asking reasonable things taking out the trash cleaning, I think.
Gwenevere Abriel: Those are reasonable for the age that you've just described. It's about how you're shaping the behavior, you've been using yelling and I like the talking about the discussion with the with the respectful conversation that was really cool.
Gwenevere Abriel: And now what you might do is in those discussions saying and I need to show you
Gwenevere Abriel: That I'll reward good behavior.
Gwenevere Abriel: With this, what do you guys want we can kind of make a little plan together, but I'm also going to take away some privilege when you when you drop the ball just too so that
Gwenevere Abriel: Over time, you remember to get those chores done. Okay, that's what that's going to look like now I can't yell anymore. All right. We'll talk more. Okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: Do you have up. Do I need to message, your doctor.
Daniel Guerrero: Please, and
Daniel Guerrero: I was going to ask you, I'm really having. I don't know.
Daniel Guerrero: What it is, when my insurance but
Daniel Guerrero: They're not wanting to, I guess, I don't know if they're not wanting to pay for twice. That's
Gwenevere Abriel: Let's find out which which insurance do you have, do you have
Daniel Guerrero: Cross Blue Shield.
Gwenevere Abriel: So I have a lot of people that are in Blue Cross, sometimes it's. Did you get a letter in the mail. What happened.
Daniel Guerrero: It was a pharmacy. They told me that they weren't wanting to pay for it, they were making you wait
Gwenevere Abriel: Pay for the medication.
Daniel Guerrero: Wait, huh, okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: It's your doctor, Dr. Solomon. I've got a client that's going to come in shortly. So I got to talk fast is it all men are all real.
Daniel Guerrero: Man, okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: Hold on, let me just write it really quick.
Daniel Guerrero: I would like to get it you know like once or once a week, like the whole week.
Gwenevere Abriel: Okay, so here's the deal, Daniel. The reason why it's had these short ones is to reinforce you're showing up for
Gwenevere Abriel: Various so
Gwenevere Abriel: You've been showing up pretty consistently. I think you're, you're, you've got some buy in. I think you like some pieces of it.
Gwenevere Abriel: So we can give it a try. We can I can I can say, hey, let's give it a try. Let's see it. See, this is positive reinforcement. So if you continue to show up for services that we can sort of reinforced by extending that prescription and let's try that. Let's do it for from group to group.
Gwenevere Abriel: group to group and then you keep but the motivation for coming in and seeing me will probably as everyone does it gets minimizing it dissipates or like a NOTHING GOING TO HAPPEN IF I but it will it will go back even to daily dosing so
Daniel Guerrero: Please don't.
Gwenevere Abriel: Don't lose that. Okay. But let me do it now. Do you need any other medication besides this Suboxone
Daniel Guerrero: No, no, just
Okay, so he attended
Gwenevere Abriel: Individual therapy today.
Gwenevere Abriel: Which Day Is your group.
Daniel Guerrero: We meet on Monday mornings at nine o'clock. Okay.
Gwenevere Abriel: So what may happen is, so probably right now, get you to Monday and then it'll start Monday to Monday. Okay.
Daniel Guerrero: That'd be great. Thank you. Sure.
Gwenevere Abriel: All right, man. Let's talk about our next session when we're going to meet
In there, you know,
Gwenevere Abriel: You don't happen to have any day off next week do by some miracle. Okay, um,
Daniel Guerrero: Sundays off, but I don't know if you want to work on a Sunday.
Gwenevere Abriel: Not these days I HAVEN'T BEEN I'VE BEEN squeaking in people here and there on Saturday, just because people cannot get away, but the derivative Buddha Buddha, boo, boo, boo.
Gwenevere Abriel: That's about
Gwenevere Abriel: For Friday at. So that's two to three. That's 12 to one one. Whoa, that's not good for you. You need to be in one
Daniel Guerrero: Right at two o'clock. Yes, ma'am.
Gwenevere Abriel: Yeah, that didn't work for you need something like 12. Let me see something. Let me see if I can move my 12 o'clock.
Gwenevere Abriel: To your write this down. I'm going to attach you to confer but I'm looking at February 12 at 1210
Gwenevere Abriel: And I'm going to ask my client if she can meet at 110 instead. Okay.
Yeah.
Gwenevere Abriel: 12 that what 1210 for you.
Daniel Guerrero: At 1210 okay
Gwenevere Abriel: Yeah, because I think that will suit your schedule.
Better
Gwenevere Abriel: Okay, all right, man. I've sent the message and
Gwenevere Abriel: I will see you on Monday.
Daniel Guerrero: Have a good day. Thank you very much.
Gwenevere Abriel: You bet. You bet.